IHE DEC Gateway - first draft ready for review (#163)
IHE/sdpi-fhir: SDPi_Supplement/asciidoc/volume2/gateways/tf2-ch-b-gateway-pid-mapping.adoc

===== PID - Patient Identification Segment

> The HL7 Patient Identification (PID) segment requires a mapping from the SDC patient context information to the PID segment fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HL7 Patient Identification (PID) segment requires a mapping from BICEPS patient context data (pm:PatientContextState) to the PID segment fields.
```

Author: Done.

.Prerequisite of Valid Patient Context
[NOTE#ref_valid_pt_ctxt_note]
====

> The SDC patient context information shall only be mapped to the corresponding fields in the HL7 PID segment when the requirements (e. g. inferred patient ensemble context, associated patient context, etc.) as defined in the <<ieee_11073_10700_2022>> are fulfilled.

Reviewer: This should be transformed to an sdpi_requirement block.

Author: Done.

> If the SDC patient context information shall not be used for the mapping, please refer to the <<ihe_pcd_tf-2_2019>> on how to populate the fields of the PID segment in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the SDC patient context information is not intended be used for the mapping, please refer to the <<ihe_pcd_tf-2_2019>> on how to populate the fields of the PID segment in this case.
```

Author: Done.

====

====== PID-3 Patient Identifier List

> The PID-3 field is a list of patient identifiers (e. g. medical record number, socal security number, visit number, account number, etc.). The table <<ref_tbl_pid3_mapping>> defines the mapping of the SDC patient identifier to the data fields of the HL7 data type *CX* used in the PID-3 field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PID-3 field is a list of patient identifiers (e. g. medical record number, socal security number, visit number, account number, etc.). The table <<ref_tbl_pid3_mapping>> defines the mapping of the BICEPS patient identification to the data fields of the HL7 data type *CX* used in the PID-3 field.
```

Author: done.

> The SDC patient identifier element *pm:PatientContextState/pm:Identification* may contain more than one patient identifier. Each SDC patient identifier shall be mapped according to the <<ref_tbl_pid3_mapping>> table and added to the PID-3 patient identifier list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The BICEPS patient identification element (pm:PatientContextState/pm:Identification) may contain more than one patient identifier. Each SDC patient identifier shall be mapped according to the <<ref_tbl_pid3_mapping>> table and added to the PID-3 patient identifier list.
```

Reviewer: This should be splitted into two requirements, one may, one shall.

Author: done. I kept the bold presentation since I used that everywhere - just to be consistent. Rephrased the sentence to a conditional shall in order to avoid a may requirement.

[#ref_tbl_pid3_mapping]
.PID-3 Patient Identifier List Mapping
|===
|HL7 Field |HL7 Component Name |SDC Attribute/Element |Comments

|PID-3/CX-1
|ID Number
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:Identification
/@Extension
|The @Extension attribute contains the unique patient identifer.

*Note that the field may contain a null value indicating that the identifier is missing.*

|PID-3/CX-4
|Assigning Authority
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:Identification
| HL7 data type *HD*

|PID-3/CX-4.1
|Namespace ID
|/@Root
|The @Root contains the unique identification of the HDO.

*Note that if the HDO identifer is not defined the CX-4 field shall be left empty.*

|PID-3/CX-5
|Identifier Type Code
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:Identification
/pm:Type
/@Code

> |The type of the patient identifier set in the @Code attribute shall be set to a value from HL7 V2 table 0203. The @CodingSystem shall be set to *"urn:oid:2.16.840.1.113883.18.108"*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|The type of the patient identifier set in the @Code attribute shall be set to a value from HL7 V2 table 0203. The @CodingSystem shall be set to `urn:oid:2.16.840.1.113883.18.108`.
```

Author: done.

====== PID-7 Date/Time of Birth
The PID-7 field shall contain the date & time of birth. The table <<ref_tbl_pid7_mapping>> defines the mapping of the SDC patient's date of birth information to the data fields of the HL7 data type *DTM* used in the PID-7 field.

[#ref_tbl_pid7_mapping]
.PID-7 Date/Time of Birth Mapping
|===
|HL7 Field |HL7 Component Name |SDC Attribute/Element |Comments

|PID-6/DTM-1
|Date/Time
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:DateOfBirth
|Note that the HL7 date & time format differs from the xsd date/time formats and requires a mapping accordingly (see also <<ref_expl_dt_mapping>>).

|===

[#ref_expl_dt_mapping]
.Date/Time Format Mapping
====
xsd:dateTime: *2001-10-26T21:32:52* -> HL7 DTM: *20011026213252*

xsd:date: *2001-10-26* -> HL7 DTM: *20011026*
====

====== PID-8 Administrative Sex
The PID-8 field shall contain the code for the administrative sex. However, in the clinical context of a point of care device the biological sex, or sex at birth is important for various algorithms. The table <<ref_tbl_pid8_mapping>> defines the mapping of the SDC patient's sex information to the data fields of the HL7 data type *IS* used in the PID-8 field.

[NOTE]
====

> The sex and gender of a patient (or a newborn) cannot exactly be mapped from ISO/IEEE 11073-10207 to HL7 V2. The domain information and service model only contains an attribute for sex as defined by biological and physiological characteristics. HL7 V2, on the other hand, only provides a field for the administrative sex as defined by the socially constructed roles, behaviours, activities, and attributes that a given society considers appropriate. The biological sex, however, does not necessarily match a person’s administrative gender. Mapping from one to the other would therefore introduce errors. However, in the clinical context of a point of care device the biological sex, or sex at birth is important for various algorithms, and therefore, shall be mapped to the PID-8 field.

Reviewer 2: Didn't we decide at the workshop that this field could not be mapped? Even though gender is very important for clinical applications, I don't think a mapping is appropriate here.

Author: Yes, you are right. However, the sex used by the device e. g. for the ECG algorithm might be important for the system receiving the data. When the data are not plausible or lead to wrong diagnosis, the clinician could still check which sex has been set during the measurement. I think this is an important information. It must be clear for the receiver that the sex from the gateway is a setting on the device used for clinical applications.

Reviewer 2: As written in ISO 27269 International Patient Summary: 
"Some countries require 'gender' as part of their identification of the patient. It SHALL not be used to record a patient's sex.", I do not believe this mapping is appropriate. I suggest using an OBX  segment with the LOINC Code 99501-9 and the new HL7 FHIR Valueset https://build.fhir.org/extension-patient-sexforclinicaluse.html

Author: Todd recommended to add a note for the reviewers to asked for their opinions.

Author: For the PID-8 mapping, I added a note for reviews with a request for comment.

[#ref_tbl_pid10_mapping]
.PID-10 Race Mapping
|===
|HL7 Field |HL7 Component Name |SDC Attribute/Element |Comments

|PID-10/CWE-1
|Identifier
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@Code
|

|PID-10/CWE-2
|Text
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@SymbolicCodeName
|

|PID-10/CWE-3
|Name of Coding System
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@CodingSystem
|

|PID-10/CWE-4
|Alternate Identifier
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/pm:Translation
/@Code
|Note that only the first entry of the *pm:Translation* element list shall be mapped.

|PID-10/CWE-6
|Name of Alternate Coding System
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/pm:Translation
/@CodingSystem
|Note that only the first entry of the *pm:Translation* element list shall be mapped.

|PID-10/CWE-7
|Coding System Version ID
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@CodingSystemVersion
|

|PID-10/CWE-8
|Alternate Coding System Version ID
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/pm:Translation
/@CodingSystemVersion
|Note that only the first entry of the *pm:Translation* element list shall be mapped.

|===

====== PID-31 Identity Unknown Indicator

> The PID-31 field shall indicate whether or not the patient's identity is known.

Reviewer: I think this is rather a definition:
```suggestion
The PID-31 field indicates whether or not the patient's identity is known.
```

Reviewer 3: Agree with the English Grammar Police: Simplify to only "whether".  That said, I hear people use both every day so ... it's not like anyone (but The Grammar Police!!!) would ever even notice, let alone say anything.

Author: Done.

> The field value shall be determined from the present of a patient-inferred ensemble context (*pm:EnsembleContextDescriptor/pm:Type/@Code = MDC_IDT_ENSEMBLE_PATIENT_INFERRED*) with an associated context association state (*pm:EnsembleContextState/@ContextAssociation = Assoc*). In this case, the value shall be set to "Y".

Reviewer: I suggest to make lines 297 and 299 a single requirement and merge it with the definition in line 295.
```suggestion
.RXXXX
[sdpi_requirement#rXXXX,sdpi_req_level=shall]
****
If a patient-inferred ensemble context (*pm:EnsembleContextDescriptor/pm:Type/@Code = MDC_IDT_ENSEMBLE_PATIENT_INFERRED*) with an associated context association state (*pm:EnsembleContextState/@ContextAssociation = Assoc*) exists, the PID-31 field shall be set to `Y`, otherwise `N`.

.Notes
[%collapsible]
====
NOTE: The PID-31 field indicates whether the patient's identity is known.
====
****
```

Author: Done.

In all other cases, the value shall be set to "N".

====== PID-33 Last Update Date/Time

> The PID-33 field shall contain the date & time of last patient context update. The table <<ref_tbl_pid33_mapping>> defines the mapping of the SDC patient context update information to the data fields of the HL7 data type *DTM* used in the PID-33 field.

Reviewer: For the sake of not tainting the review with "please make this a requirement box" any further:

- Each _shall_ should be transformed to a requirement box, esp. to be able to link it to other specs in the long run (RI).
- Alternatively, I think some of these requirement texts could also be phrased as definitions, which are mandatory to be implemented in the way they are defined. For example here: "The PID-33 field contains the date & time of last patient context update."

Author: Done.

[#ref_tbl_pid33_mapping]
.PID-33 Last Update Date/Time Mapping
|===
|HL7 Field |HL7 Component Name |SDC Attribute/Element |Comments

|PID-33/DTM-1
|Date/Time
|If *pm:PatientContextState
/pm:Identification
/@ContextAssociation = Assoc*, the field shall be set to *pm:PatientContextState/@BindingStartTime*.

In all other cases, the field shall be set to *pm:PatientContextState/@BindingEndTime*.

|Note that the HL7 date & time format differs from the xsd date/time formats and requires a mapping accordingly (see also <<ref_expl_dt_mapping>>).

|===

[NOTE]
====

> The SDC data model does not support the concept of a last update timestamp. The SDC consumer participant could determine context updates from the SDC state report events (receiving timestamp of the state report). However, when the connection between the SDC provider and SDC consumer gets lost, the SDC consumer will not be able to determine the lastest update timestamp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The BICEPS participant model does not support the concept of a last update timestamp. An <<actor_somds_consumer>> could determine context updates from the SDC state report events (receiving timestamp of the state report). However, when the connection between the <<actor_somds_provider>> and <<actor_somds_consumer>> gets lost, the <<actor_somds_consumer>> will not be able to determine the lastest update timestamp.
```

Author: Done.

====
****

[#ref_tbl_pid10_mapping]
.PID-10 Race Mapping
|===
|HL7 Field |HL7 Component Name |SDC Attribute/Element |Comments

|PID-10/CWE-1
|Identifier
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@Code
|

|PID-10/CWE-2
|Text
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@SymbolicCodeName
|

|PID-10/CWE-3
|Name of Coding System
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@CodingSystem
|

|PID-10/CWE-4
|Alternate Identifier
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/pm:Translation
/@Code
|Note that only the first entry of the *pm:Translation* element list shall be mapped.

|PID-10/CWE-6
|Name of Alternate Coding System
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/pm:Translation
/@CodingSystem
|Note that only the first entry of the *pm:Translation* element list shall be mapped.

|PID-10/CWE-7
|Coding System Version ID
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/@CodingSystemVersion
|

|PID-10/CWE-8
|Alternate Coding System Version ID
|pm:PatientContextState
/pm:CoreData
/pm:Race
/pm:Translation
/@CodingSystemVersion
|Note that only the first entry of the *pm:Translation* element list shall be mapped.

|===

====== PID-31 Identity Unknown Indicator
.R8109

> [sdpi_requirement#r8109,sdpi_req_level=shall]

Author: Fixed!
